In this lecture, you'll learn about Loopback Interfaces. A loopback interface is a logical interface,
and it allows you to assign an IP address to a router or a Layer 3 switch, which is not tied to a physical interface.
Because we don't have any physical attributes that can fail, loopback interfaces never go down. Loopbacks
are logical, so it's impossible for them to physically be in the same subnet as other devices. So, they're
usually assigned /32 subnet masks to avoid wasting IP addresses.
That's the standard.
It's best practice to assign a loopback interface on all of your routers and all of your Layer 3 switches.
The loopback is commonly used for traffic that terminates on the router itself.
That could be most commonly at management traffic. Also, for other things like voice over IP (VoIP)
if you need to send voice over IP traffic to the router, also for BGP peering, etc. That provides redundancy
if there are multiple paths to the router.
You'll see how that works in a second. The loopback is also used to identify the router in OSPF because
the loopback address is used as the router ID. So, you'll see this when we do the OSPF section.
When you're looking at the OSPF database, etc., you'll see routers being identified by their router ID, which is
the highest the loopback address on that router.
The same loopback interface is usually used for multiple tasks.
For example, if you need to send traffic to the router for management and for BGP, we'll usually just have one
loopback interface and use the same IP address for everything. Multiple loopbacks can be configured though.
It's not common, we don't normally do that.
It's usually only done for special use cases where an additional loopback is required,
so not standard.
Okay, so here you'll see an example of why we're using a loopback.
We've got a PC,
let's say, which is behind router R4 and it's got IP address 10.1.2.10, and we want to connect
to the R1 router to manage it. We've got two paths we can get to R1 via R4 from.
We can either go along the top path, or we can go along the bottom path.
But if the top path goes down, we can't connect to the 10.0.0.1 IP address in R1, it's down.
If the bottom path goes down, we can't connect to the 10.0.3.1.
So, we're going to use a loopback. So that way, we get a single IP address that we can use to connect to R1
even if one of those paths goes down.
So what we do is we add interface Loopback 0, and we give it IP address, in our example,
192.168.1.1/32.
You can use any IP address you want for the loopback, and we then advertise that in the routing protocol.
R4 will then learn the two paths that it can use to get to 192.168.1.1,
and it will use whichever one is got the lowest cost or both
if they've got equal costs. And R4 can still connect to 192.168.1.1 even
if either path goes down.
So this is useful for management, and it's really critical for other things, like BGP and IP telephony.
Let's say that we're sending IP telephony traffic from behind R4 to R1, we want to make sure
that it's always going to get there even if one of the path goes down.
So we don't direct it at a physical address on R1, which can go down. We direct it at the logical address.
In that way, even if one path goes down,
the traffic is still going to get there across the other path.
So that's why we use the loopbacks. So let's configure this in the lab. It's going to be a quick and easy lab.
We'll do it right now.
So I'm going to put the loopback interface 192.168.1.1 IP address
/32 on R1, and we'll see how R4 has got the two paths to get there.
Okay, so I'm on the lab. I'm on R4 here, and I'll just check that
I've got EIGRP running everywhere. So I'll do a
'show ip route' and I can see I've got an EIGRP route going out fastEthernet2/0, which is via R5, and
I've got other EIGRP routes going fastEthernet0/0, which is R3.
So, I want to have two different paths available with one IP address that
I can use across those two different paths to get to R1. So if I go on R1 and I do a
'show ip interface brief',
I've just got my physical interfaces configured there right now.
So I'll go to global configuration, and then, to create a loopback interface,
the command is just 'interface loopback' and then the number you want to use. That creates the interface,
as well as taking you to the configuration mode for the interface.
And notice the interface goes up immediately because it is a loopback.
There is no need to do a 'no shutdown'.
If I do a 'no shutdown', it won't do any harm though, that's okay.
Okay,
I need to configure the IP address on here. So 'ip address',
I was going to give it 192.168.1.1, and I'll follow best practice of using
a /32  subnet mask,
so that's 255.255.255.255.
So, that is my loopback interface configured and given an IP address. I also need to make sure that it's being
advertised in my routing protocol.
So I'll do a
'do show run', and for this section,
EIGRP, just to check my EIGRP config, and I can see I'm using EIGRP 100 and it's just network
10.0.0.0
that is included in there right now.
So, I need to include my loopback address as well.
So I'll go 'route EIGRP 100', and then 'network 192.168.1.1'
and it's a wildcard mask,
that's the inverse of a subnet mask, so '0.0.0.0', and hit enter.
And now, if I go back over to R4, EIGRP converges pretty quickly.
So, let's see if the route is there yet.
Yeah, it's there already. I've got a route
going to 192.168.1.1. There are two paths, but one of them has got a better
cost.
So, that's why it's the fastEthernet0/0 path that is made it into the routing table
right now.
I can ping 192.168.1.1, and that works.
And if I traceroute to 192.168.1.1, I can see that it's going along the
top path with the next hop of 10.1.1.2,
and that was out interface fastEthernet0/0. So let's check that I can failover and still
get to the loopback, so I'll go 'config t' on here and go to 'interface fastEthernet0/0', and I'm going
to 'shutdown' that interface. So that first path is not going to be available anymore. I see my EIGRP adjacency
going down, and now, if I do a 'show ip route', so before the route to the loopback was going via fastEthernet0/0,
if I do a 'show ip route' now, I can see that it's in the routing table from EIGRP again, and
now it's failed over to the other path. It's going to use fastEthernet2/0. So I can still
ping 192.168.1.1, and if I traceroute to it, I'm going to see it going down the bottom
path via R5. Okay, so that's why we want to use loopbacks, so that we can get to our routers no matter what
path we've got available, still using that same IP address. Okay, that was it for loopbacks. See you in the next
lecture.